MSC4388: Secure out-of-band channel for sign in with QR (#4388)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/4388-secure-qr-channel.md

# MSC4388: Secure out-of-band channel for sign in with QR

This proposal forms part of [MSC4108] to make it easy to sign in on a new device with the help of an existing device.

It proposes a mechanism for a new an existing device to establish a secure out-of-band channel through which they can

> communicate to facilitate the sign in on the new device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It proposes a mechanism for a new and an existing device to establish a secure out-of-band channel through which they can
communicate to facilitate the sign in of the new device.
```

**[base URL]**.

At this point Device S should check that the received intent matches what the user has asked to do on the device.

4. **Device S sends the initial payload**

Device S performs an ECDH operation using **Ss** and **Gp** to compute the shared secret **SharedSecret**.

The **SharedSecret** is then used to initialize an
[HPKE encryption context](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9180.html#name-encryption-and-decryption)
**Context_DeviceS_Send** using the `KeySchedule<ROLE>()` function.

After this step, **Ss** is discarded.

**Context_DeviceS_Send**

```
SharedSecret := ECDH(Ss, Gp)

Context_DeviceS_Send := KeySchedule<S>(mode=0x00, shared_secret=SharedSecret, info="MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN")
```

With this, Device S has established its sending side of the secure channel. Device S then derives a confirmation payload
that Device G can use to confirm that the channel is secure. It contains:

- The string `MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN_INITIATE`, encrypted and authenticated with ChaCha20-Poly1305 using
  the `ContextS.Seal()` function of context **Context_DeviceS_Send**.
- Its public ephemeral key **Sp**.

```

> TaggedCiphertext := Context_DeviceS_Send.Seal("MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN_INITIATE", "")

Reviewer 2: You did not miss anything. It's well defined and clearly explained which sequence token is used when.

Thanks for adding this.

It checks that the plaintext matches the string `MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN_INITIATE`, failing and aborting if not.

```
Plaintext := Context_DeviceG_Receive.Open(TaggedCiphertext, "")

unless Plaintext == "MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN_INITIATE":
     FAIL
```

It then derives its own HPKE context **Context_DeviceG_Send** for sending based on the scheme from the
[Oblivious HTTP](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9458#name-encapsulation-of-responses) RFC, using a secret exported
from **Context_DeviceG_Receive**:

**Context_DeviceG_Send**

```
Secret := Context_DeviceG_Receive.Export("MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN response", 32)

ResponseNonce := random(32)
Salt := Sp || ResponseNonce

AeadKey := HKDF_SHA256(Secret, "key", salt=Salt, size=32)
AeadNonce := HKDF_SHA256(Secret, "key", salt=Salt, size=12)
ExporterSecret := [0; 32]

Context_DeviceG_Send := Context<S>(AeadKey, AeadNonce, 0, ExporterSecret)
```

**Warning** The exporter interface of the **Context_DeviceG_Send** context **MUST NOT** be used, as it is initialized
with a dummy exporter secret. Aside from this limitation, the response context supports encryption and decryption in the

> same manner as the primary context, enabling bidirectional use of HPKE.

Reviewer 2: Well we can initialize it with some real exporter secret, but that would be more expensive and we wouldn't use the exporter interface of the response context.

Another alternative would be to not use the HPKE context for the other direction, but then we would need to reimplement the nonce handling.

the first payload; Device S in the text below). Thus the recipient party (the one to receive the first payload; Device G
in the text below) has no assurance as to who actually sent the payload. In QR code login, we work around this problem
by exploiting the fact that both of these devices are physically present during the exchange and offloading the check
that they are both in the correct state to the user performing the QR code login process.

Additionally the HPKE RFC exclusively defines unidirectional encryption. The scheme found in the [Oblivious
HTTP](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9458) RFC under the [Encapsulation of
Responses](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9458#name-encapsulation-of-responses) section is used to enable
bidirectional encryption in our chosen HPKE scheme.

### Establishment

Participants:

- Device G (the device generating the QR code)
- Device S (the device scanning the QR code)

Regardless of which device generates the QR code, either device can be the existing (already signed in) device. The
other device is then the new device (one seeking to be signed in).

> Symmetric encryption uses a separate encryption key for each sender, both derived from a shared secret using HKDF.

Author: ```suggestion
Bidirectional encryption uses a separate encryption key for each sender, both derived from a shared secret using HKDF.
```

Perhaps?

Separate nonces are used for each direction of the communication channel. Device S will create a base nonce from the

> shared secret, while Device G will create a new random base nonce. Each base nonce is mixed with a

Reviewer 2: I think that's a term that's somewhat commonly used when different sources of randomness are combined.

But I think "combined" works better here. Agree.

> monotonically-incrementing sequence number. Devices initially set both numbers to `0` and increment the corresponding

Reviewer 2: Makes sense.

derived key material and maintains the cryptographic state needed to protect messages. It provides functions for
encrypting messages in a single direction using AEAD, and exposes an exporter interface for deriving additional secrets
bound to the established context.

**Context_S**

```
SharedSecret := ECDH(Ss, Gp)
Secret := LabeledExtract(shared_secret, "secret", SharedSecret)

Mode := 0x00
PskIdHash := LabeledExtract("", "psk_id_hash", "")
InfoHash := LabeledExtract("", "info_hash", "MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN")
KeyScheduleContext := concat(Mode, PskIdHash, InfoHash)

AeadKey_S := LabeledExpand(secret, "key", KeyScheduleContext, 32)
BaseNonce := LabeledExpand(secret, "base_nonce", key_schedule_context, 12)
ExporterSecret := LabeledExpand(secret, "exp", key_schedule_context, 32)

Context_S := Context<S>(AeadKey_S, BaseNonce_S, 0, ExporterSecret)
```

With this, Device S has established its sending side of the secure channel. Device S then derives a confirmation payload
that Device G can use to confirm that the channel is secure. It contains:

- The string `MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN_INITIATE`, encrypted and authenticated with ChaCha20-Poly1305.
- Its public ephemeral key **Sp**.

```

> TaggedCiphertext := Context_S_S.Seal("MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN_INITIATE", "")

Author: ```suggestion
TaggedCiphertext := Context_S.Seal("MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN_INITIATE", "")
```

> LoginInitiateMessage := UnpaddedBase64(TaggedCiphertext) || "|" || UnpaddedBase64(Sp)

Reviewer 2: Sure, I don't mind them being gone. Not sure if @dkasak has some attachment to those separators.

**TaggedCiphertext** using **AeadKey_S**, obtaining a plaintext.

**Context_G**

```
(TaggedCiphertext, Sp) := Unpack(LoginInitiateMessage)

SharedSecret := ECDH(Gs, Sp)
Secret := LabeledExtract(shared_secret, "secret", SharedSecret)

Mode := 0x00
PskIdHash := LabeledExtract("", "psk_id_hash", "")
InfoHash := LabeledExtract("", "info_hash", "MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN")
KeyScheduleContext := concat(Mode, PskIdHash, InfoHash)

AeadKey_S := LabeledExpand(secret, "key", KeyScheduleContext, 32)
BaseNonce := LabeledExpand(secret, "base_nonce", key_schedule_context, 12)
ExporterSecret := LabeledExpand(secret, "exp", key_schedule_context, 32)

Context_G := Context<R>(AeadKey_S, BaseNonce_S, 0, ExporterSecret)
```

It checks that the plaintext matches the string `MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN_INITIATE`, failing and aborting if not.

```
Plaintext := Context_G.Open(TaggedCiphertext, "")

unless Plaintext == "MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN_INITIATE":
     FAIL
```

It then derives a response context, which enables bidirectional communication:

**ResponseContext_G**

```
Secret := Context_G.Export("MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN response", 32)

ResponseNonce := random(32)

> Salt := Sp || ResponseNonce

Reviewer 2: Yes, it's the same as `concat()` in the HPKE RFC. Oh I thought I used `||` exclusively since it's what we used in the previous versions of this MSC, but a bunch of `concat()` call snuck in.

We can switch to `concat()` if you think that's better or we can revert to `||` in the places where I left the `concat()` calls.

AeadKey_G := HKDF_SHA256(Secret, "key", salt=Salt, size=32)
AeadNonce := HKDF_SHA256(Secret, "key", salt=Salt, size=12)
ExporterSecret := [0; 32]

ResponseContext_G := Context<S>(AeadKey, AeadNonce, 0, ExporterSecret)
```

**Warning** The exporter interface of the response context **MUST NOT** be used, as it is initialized with a dummy
exporter secret. Aside from this limitation, the response context supports encryption and decryption in the same manner
as the primary context, enabling bidirectional use of HPKE.

Following the creation of the response context **ResponseContext_G**, it responds with a dummy payload containing the
string `MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN_OK`:

```
TaggedCiphertext := ResponseContext_G.Seal("MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN_OK", "")

> LoginOkMessage := UnpaddedBase64Encode(TaggedCiphertext) || ResponseNonce

Reviewer 2: Oh indeed, the parenthesis should include the nonce as well.

```
CheckBytes := Context_S.Export("MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN_CHECKCODE|" || Gp || "|" || Sp , size=2)
CheckCode := NumToString(CheckBytes[0] % 10) || NumToString(CheckBytes[1] % 10)
```

Device S then displays an indicator to the user that the secure channel has been established and that the **CheckCode**
should be entered on the other device when prompted. Example wording could say "Secure connection established. Enter the
code XY on your other device."

7. **Out-of-band confirmation**

**Warning**: *This step is crucial for the security of the scheme since it overcomes the aforementioned limitation of
HPKE.*

Device G asks the user to enter the **CheckCode** that is being displayed on Device S.

The purpose of the code being entered is to ensure that the user has actually checked their other device rather than
just pressing "continue", and that the Device S has been able to determine that the channel is secure.

The exact points in the flow that the user is prompted for the **CheckCode** is described in [MSC4108].

Device G compares the code that the user has entered with the **CheckCode** that it calculates using the same mechanism
as before:

```

> CheckBytes := Context_G.Export("MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN_CHECKCODE|" || Gp "|" || Sp , size=2)

Author: Ditto:

```suggestion
CheckBytes := Context_G.Export("MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN_CHECKCODE" || Gp || Sp , size=2)
```

CheckCode := NumToString(CheckBytes[0] % 10) || NumToString(CheckBytes[1] % 10)
```

If the code that the user enters matches then the secure channel is established.

Subsequent payloads sent from G should be encrypted using the response context **ResponseContext_G**, while payloads

> sent from S should be encrypted with **Context_S**, incrementing the corresponding nonce for each message sent/received.

Author: Hmm, is it the nonce that is incremented? Or is the sequence number that is incremented (which is then XORed)?

Speaking of which, I don't see when the aforementioned XORing happens?

Author: Ah ha. I get it now.

I don't think we need to repeat the definition, but instead directly refer to it. I've attempted to do so in 98f94a02822d8ac20ce0b7f05e7cfde09289c891.

```
Plaintext := Context_G.Open(TaggedCiphertext, "")

unless Plaintext == "MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN_INITIATE":
     FAIL
```

It then derives a response context, which enables bidirectional communication:

**ResponseContext_G**

```
Secret := Context_G.Export("MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN response", 32)

ResponseNonce := random(32)
Salt := Sp || ResponseNonce

AeadKey_G := HKDF_SHA256(Secret, "key", salt=Salt, size=32)
AeadNonce := HKDF_SHA256(Secret, "key", salt=Salt, size=12)
ExporterSecret := [0; 32]

ResponseContext_G := Context<S>(AeadKey, AeadNonce, 0, ExporterSecret)
```

**Warning** The exporter interface of the response context **MUST NOT** be used, as it is initialized with a dummy
exporter secret. Aside from this limitation, the response context supports encryption and decryption in the same manner
as the primary context, enabling bidirectional use of HPKE.

Following the creation of the response context **ResponseContext_G**, it responds with a dummy payload containing the
string `MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN_OK`:

```
TaggedCiphertext := ResponseContext_G.Seal("MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN_OK", "")

> LoginOkMessage := UnpaddedBase64Encode(TaggedCiphertext || ResponseNonce)

Author: ```suggestion
LoginOkMessage := UnpaddedBase64Encode(TaggedCiphertext || ResponseBaseNonce)
```

```

We rely on the  `Seal()` operation computing and incrementing the nonce for us as described in
[HPKE](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9180.html#section-5.2-7).

Device G sends **LoginOkMessage** as the `data` payload via a `PUT` request to the insecure rendezvous session.

6. **Verification by Device S**

Device S receives a response over the insecure rendezvous session by polling with `GET` requests, potentially from
Device G.

It proceeds to derive the response context by unpacking the base response nonce from the **LoginOkMessage** and
creating a response context on its own.

**ResponseContext_S**

```
(TaggedCiphertext, ResponseNonce) := Unpack(LoginOkMessage)

Secret := Context_S.Export("MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN response", 32)

> Salt := Sp || ResponseNonce

Author: ```suggestion
Salt := Sp || ResponseBaseNonce
```

Device S performs an ECDH operation using **Ss** and **Gp** to compute the shared secret **SharedSecret**.

The **SharedSecret** is then used to initialize an
[HPKE encryption context](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9180.html#name-encryption-and-decryption)
**Context_DeviceS_Send** using the `KeySchedule<ROLE>()` function.

After this step, **Ss** is discarded.

**Context_DeviceS_Send**

```
SharedSecret := ECDH(Ss, Gp)

Context_DeviceS_Send := KeySchedule<S>(mode=0x00, shared_secret=SharedSecret, info="MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN")
```

With this, Device S has established its sending side of the secure channel. Device S then derives a confirmation payload
that Device G can use to confirm that the channel is secure. It contains:

- The string `MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN_INITIATE`, encrypted and authenticated with ChaCha20-Poly1305 using
  the `ContextS.Seal()` function of context **Context_DeviceS_Send** with additional authentication data:
  - the homeserver **base URL** from the QR code
  - the rendezvous session **ID** from the QR code
  - the **sequence token** returned by the homeserver when calling `GET` on the rendezvous session
- Its public ephemeral key **Sp**.

```

> Aad := BaseUrl || RendezvousId || SequenceToken

Author: This is addressed by 5b6dc1eded7aa66cbd465469ad8a5b19fa6b883b

AeadNonce := HKDF_SHA256(Secret, "key", salt=Salt, size=12)
ExporterSecret := [0; 32]

Context_DeviceG_Send := Context<S>(AeadKey, AeadNonce, 0, ExporterSecret)
```

**Warning** The exporter interface of the **Context_DeviceG_Send** context **MUST NOT** be used, as it is initialized
with a dummy exporter secret. Aside from this limitation, the response context supports encryption and decryption in the
same manner as the primary context, enabling bidirectional use of HPKE.

Following the creation of the response context **Context_DeviceG_Send**, it responds with a dummy payload containing the
string `MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN_OK` that is sealed with the additional authentication data similar to before, but the
**sequence token** is the one that was received with the `GET` request that returned **LoginInitiateMessage**:

```
Aad := BaseUrl || RendezvousId || SequenceToken
TaggedCiphertext := Context_DeviceG_Send.Seal("MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN_OK", Aad)
LoginOkMessage := UnpaddedBase64Encode(ResponseNonce || TaggedCiphertext)
```

Device G sends **LoginOkMessage** as the `data` payload via a `PUT` request to the insecure rendezvous session.

> 6. **Verification by Device S**

Reviewer 3: Note to other readers (including future-me, because I keep needing to remind myself how this works):

The security of this scheme is established by Device S decrypting and verifying this message.  The messages are encrypted by the result of the ECDH of G and S's ephemeral keys (plus extra steps).  S knows that it has G's public key because it was obtained from the QR scan (we assume that the attacker can't modify the displayed QR code).  So if it is able to decrypt and verify the message, then it knows:

- that it was received directly from G, since nobody other than S and G could obtain the shared secret to encrypt the message.  In other words, the message from G to S was not tampered with.
- that G has received the correct public key from S, otherwise the message from G would have been encrypted using the wrong key, and would be undecryptable/unverifiable.

Since, at this point, S knows that both devices have the correct public key for the other device, it knows that the encrypted channel is secure.

a _rendezvous ID_ which, along with the server [base URL], should be shared out-of-band with Device B.

The rendezvous ID points to an arbitrary data resource (the "payload") on the homeserver, which is initially populated
using data from A's initial `POST` request. The payload is a string which the homeserver must enforce a maximum length on.

Anyone who is able to reach the homeserver and has the rendezvous ID - including: Device A; Device B; or a third party; -
can then "receive" the payload by polling via a `GET` request, and "send" a new payload by making a `PUT` request.

In this way, Device A and Device B can communicate by repeatedly inspecting and updating the payload at the rendezvous session.

The maximum length of a rendezvous ID is 65,535 bytes.

### The send mechanism

Every send request MUST include a `sequence_token` value whose value is the `sequence_token` from the last `GET`
response seen by the requester. (The initiating device may also use the `sequence_token` supplied in the initial `POST` response
to immediately update the payload.) Sends will succeed only if the supplied `sequence_token` matches the server's current

> revision of the payload. This prevents concurrent writes to the payload.

Reviewer 4: Might be worth spelling out a little that this isn't so much a channel that two clients can use to send a sequence of messages between them, but instead a shared mutable spot. This then makes the APIs below easier to reason about.

This also has consequences for how to use the session, since a client can't tell if their previous payload has been received by the remote client until a remote sets a payload itself and the original client sees the change. This favours an architecture where the protocol is "ping-pong", i.e. a client sends a message, waits for a reply, then can send the next message, etc. Or to send multiple messages in a row a client would update the payload to contain a list of messages.

Author: Incorporated in d125239e087b2ca90a4fb38c16d785c252ce5957

- `429 Too Many Requests` (`M_LIMIT_EXCEEDED`) - the request has been rate limited

Response body for `200 OK` is `application/json` with contents:

|Field|Type||
|-|-|-|
|`id`|required `string`|Opaque identifier for the rendezvous session. Maximum length 65,535 bytes|
|`sequence_token`|required `string`|The opaque token to identify if the payload has changed. Maximum length 65,535 bytes|
|`expires_in_ms`|required `integer`|The number of milliseconds remaining until the rendezvous session expires|

Example response:

```http
HTTP 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json

{
    "id": "abcdEFG12345",
    "sequence_token": "VmbxF13QDusTgOCt8aoa0d2PQcnBOXeIxEqhw5aQ03o=",
    "expires_in_ms": 300000
}
```

The server can chose what level of authentication is required to create a rendezvous session. Suitable policies might
include:

- Public/open - anyone can create a rendezvous session without an access token. This allows for the QR code to be
  created on either the new or existing Matrix client.
- Requires authenticated user - this would reduce abuse to known users, but would restrict the mechanism so that the QR

>   code must be created on the existing Matrix client (and therefore the new Matrix client must have a camera).

Reviewer 4: I think this is a bit misleading, as whether or not your server requires authentication doesn't change whether you can use QR on a new Matrix client? The new Matrix client will choose a well-known server to use as the rendezvous channel, no?

```suggestion
- Requires authenticated user - this would reduce abuse to known users. This should be the default.
- Public/open - anyone can create a rendezvous session without an access token. This allows for clients to use this
  server as its default when creating QR codes as a new session (as it doesn't yet know what server the user will
  log in to).
```

The expiry time is detailed [below](#maximum-duration-of-a-rendezvous).

### `PUT /_matrix/client/v1/rendezvous/{rendezvousId}` - Send a payload to an existing rendezvous

Rate-limited: Yes
Requires authentication: No

Request body is `application/json` with contents:

|Field|Type||
|-|-|-|
|`sequence_token`|required `string`|The value of `sequence_token` from the last payload seen by the requesting device.|
|`data`|required `string`|The data payload to be sent.|

For example:

```http
PUT /_matrix/client/v1/rendezvous/abcdEFG12345 HTTP/1.1
Content-Type: application/json

{
    "sequence_token": "VmbxF13QDusTgOCt8aoa0d2PQcnBOXeIxEqhw5aQ03o=",
    "data": "new data"
}
```

The server MUST perform a compare-and-swap operation by checking that the `sequence_token` matches
the current sequence token for the session. If it does not match then the `data` MUST not be

> accepted and the `M_CONCURRENT_WRITE` error is returned.

Reviewer 4: Would be good to expand on how idempotency works here. Do we need to say the client MUST send the same payload with a given `sequence_token`? Presumably the server needs to check the payloads match if they get multiple requests to see if its a concurrent write or idempotency?

Author: Currently it isn't idempotent. I will make it so.

Author: Added in 98d3b04bf3841d82f1571073d8eec7d141146965. Synapse implementation in https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/pull/19808

> accepted and the `M_CONCURRENT_WRITE` error is returned.

Reviewer 4: Would also be good to say what the client should do when they receive a `M_CONCURRENT_WRITE`, which is to do a `GET` to fetch the new payload and then retry?

Author: Incorporated in 9aabff85bfe8c97a338e9dc6e075b8c3b3f42d46

    "sequence_token": "VmbxF13QDusTgOCt8aoa0d2PQcnBOXeIxEqhw5aQ03o=",
    "expires_in_ms": 300000
}
```

To help mitigate the threat of [unsafe content](#unsafe-content), the server SHOULD inspect the `Sec-Fetch-*`
[Fetch Metadata Request Headers](https://www.w3.org/TR/fetch-metadata/) (or other suitable headers) to identify
top-level navigation requests and return a `403` HTTP response with error code `M_FORBIDDEN` instead.

The exact header values to use are an implementation detail for the server implementation.

A future optimisation could be allow the client to "long-poll" by sending the previous `sequence_token` as a query parameter
and then the server returns when there is new data or some timeout has passed.

### `DELETE /_matrix/client/v1/rendezvous/{rendezvousId}` - cancel a rendezvous session

Rate-limited: Yes
Requires authentication: No

HTTP response codes:

- `200 OK` - rendezvous session cancelled
- `404 Not Found` (`M_NOT_FOUND`) - rendezvous session ID is not valid (it could have expired)
- `404 Not Found` (`M_UNRECOGNIZED`) - the rendezvous API is not enabled
- `429 Too Many Requests` (`M_LIMIT_EXCEEDED`) - the request has been rate limited

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

Cancelling a session will cause all future reads and writes to fail with a `404 M_NOT_FOUND`.

```

```
49 4F 5F 45 4C 45 4D 45 4E 54 5F 4D 53 43 34 33 38 38
03 01
d8 86 68 6a b2 19 7b 78 0e 30 0a 9d 4a 21 47 48 07 00 d7 92 9f 39 ab 31 b9 e5 14 37 02 48 ed 6b
00 24
65 38 64 61 36 33 35 35 2D 35 35 30 62 2D 34 61 33 32 2D 61 31 39 33 2D 31 36 31 39 64 39 38 33 30 36 36 38
00 20
68 74 74 70 73 3A 2F 2F 6D 61 74 72 69 78 2D 63 6C 69 65 6E 74 2E 6d 61 74 72 69 78 2e 6f 72 67
```

Which looks as follows as a QR with error correction level Q:
<!--
Generated with:

nix-shell -p qrencode --run 'echo "49 4F 5F 45 4C 45 4D 45 4E 54 5F 4D 53 43 34 33 38 38
03 01
d8 86 68 6a b2 19 7b 78 0e 30 0a 9d 4a 21 47 48 07 00 d7 92 9f 39 ab 31 b9 e5 14 37 02 48 ed 6b
00 24
65 38 64 61 36 33 35 35 2D 35 35 30 62 2D 34 61 33 32 2D 61 31 39 33 2D 31 36 31 39 64 39 38 33 30 36 36 38
00 20
68 74 74 70 73 3A 2F 2F 6D 61 74 72 69 78 2D 63 6C 69 65 6E 74 2E 6d 61 74 72 69 78 2e 6f 72 67" | xxd -r -p | qrencode -8 -l Q -t PNG -o ./proposals/images/4388-qr-intent01-unstable.png'
-->
![Example QR for intent 0x01](images/4388-qr-intent01-unstable.png)

It is suggested that this unstable QR prefix convention could be used by future proposals.

### M_CONCURRENT_WRITE errcode

> The unstable value of `IO_ELEMENT_MSC4388_CONCURRENT_WRITE` should be used instead of `M_CONCURRENT_WRITE`.

Reviewer 5: Perhaps too late, but:
```suggestion
The unstable value of `IO.ELEMENT.MSC4388.CONCURRENT_WRITE` should be used instead of `M_CONCURRENT_WRITE`.
```

Author: Based on https://spec.matrix.org/v1.18/client-server-api/#standard-error-response it should actually be `IO.ELEMENT.MSC4388_CONCURRENT_WRITE` as the custom namespace is `io.element.msc4388`.

But, at this point I don't think it matters - we should focus on getting the stable names right 👍

rendezvous API.

The server can chose what level of authentication is required to create a rendezvous session. Please see the description
of `POST /_matrix/client/v1/rendezvous` for a description of this.

### `POST /_matrix/client/v1/rendezvous` - Create a rendezvous session and send initial payload

Rate-limited: Yes
Requires authentication: Optional - depending on server policy

Request body is `application/json` with contents:

|Field|Type||
|-|-|-|
|`data`|required `string`|The data payload to be sent|

For example:

```http
POST /_matrix/client/v1/rendezvous HTTP/1.1
Content-Type: application/json

{
    "data": "initial data"
}
```

HTTP response codes, and Matrix error codes:

- `200 OK` - rendezvous session created
- `403 Forbidden` (`M_FORBIDDEN`) - the requester is not authorized to create the rendezvous session
- `404 Not Found` (`M_UNRECOGNIZED`) - the rendezvous API is not enabled
- `413 Payload Too Large` (`M_TOO_LARGE`) - the supplied `data` value is larger than the 4096 byte limit
- `429 Too Many Requests` (`M_LIMIT_EXCEEDED`) - the request has been rate limited

Response body for `200 OK` is `application/json` with contents:

|Field|Type||
|-|-|-|

> |`id`|required `string`|Opaque identifier for the rendezvous session. Maximum length 65,535 bytes|

Reviewer 6: 64K sounds rather big for an opaque id, and particularly jarring given the limit for the payload of 4K. Could we use the standard opaque token grammar (https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/appendices/#opaque-identifiers), or is 255 characters too short for cryptographic safety?

If not, you'll need to specify more detail about the allowed grammar. Are we talking Unicode strings (which then get encoded to UTF-8 by the JSON/REST API)? If so, please specify which characters are permitted (NUL? Unicode non-characters?). And the 64K limit applies to the UTF-8 encoding thereof?

Author: 255 bytes would be fine and so have changed this to use the opaque identifier grammar in 914ae870b1c59b219947adbae40df7a233822642.

In the QR format the extra size byte has been removed to keep the QR as compact as practical. However, the AAD encoding is left as-is with the redundant size bytes considered to have little processing impact.

Author: Actually, on further discussion we have changed the AAD encoding to use two variants of `EncodeStringAsBytes()` in 914ae870b1c59b219947adbae40df7a233822642

> |`sequence_token`|required `string`|The opaque token to identify if the payload has changed. Maximum length 65,535 bytes|

Reviewer 6: same goes for sequence_token I guess

Author: Done in 914ae870b1c59b219947adbae40df7a233822642

|`expires_in_ms`|required `integer`|The number of milliseconds remaining until the rendezvous session expires|

```http
HTTP 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json

{
    "data": "data from the previous POST/PUT",
    "sequence_token": "VmbxF13QDusTgOCt8aoa0d2PQcnBOXeIxEqhw5aQ03o=",
    "expires_in_ms": 300000
}
```

To help mitigate the threat of [unsafe content](#unsafe-content), the server SHOULD inspect the `Sec-Fetch-*`
[Fetch Metadata Request Headers](https://www.w3.org/TR/fetch-metadata/) (or other suitable headers) to identify
top-level navigation requests and return a `403` HTTP response with error code `M_FORBIDDEN` instead.

The exact header values to use are an implementation detail for the server implementation.

A future optimisation could be allow the client to "long-poll" by sending the previous `sequence_token` as a query parameter
and then the server returns when there is new data or some timeout has passed.

### `DELETE /_matrix/client/v1/rendezvous/{rendezvousId}` - cancel a rendezvous session

Rate-limited: Yes
Requires authentication: No

HTTP response codes:

- `200 OK` - rendezvous session cancelled

> - `404 Not Found` (`M_NOT_FOUND`) - rendezvous session ID is not valid (it could have expired)

Reviewer 6: Since this seems to come up every time we discuss DELETE APIs:

```suggestion
- `404 Not Found` (`M_NOT_FOUND`) - rendezvous session ID is not valid (it could have expired,
  or been cancelled by a previous `DELETE` request).
```

  HS->>-B: 200 OK<br>{"sequence_token": "2"}

  Note over B: Device B starts polling for new payloads at the<br>rendezvous session using the new `sequence_token`
  activate B

  loop Device B polls the rendezvous session for a new payload
    B->>+HS: GET /_matrix/client/v1/rendezvous/abc-def-123-456
    alt is not modified
      HS->>-B: 200 OK<br>{"sequence_token": "2", "data": "Hello from A", "expires_in_ms": 300000}
    end
  end

  note over A: Device A then receives the new payload
  opt modified
      HS->>A: 200 OK<br>{"sequence_token": "2", "data": "Hello from B", "expires_in_ms": 300000}
  end
  deactivate A

  note over A: Device A sends a new payload
    A->>+HS: PUT /_matrix/client/v1/rendezvous/abc-def-123-456<br>{"sequence_token": "2", "data": "Hello again from A"}
    HS->>-A: 200 OK<br>{"sequence_token": "3"}

  note over B: Device B then receives the new payload
  opt modified
      HS->>B: 200 OK<br>{"sequence_token": "3", "data": "Hello again from B", "expires_in_ms": 300000}
  end

  deactivate B
```

### Implementation notes

#### Maximum payload size

The server MUST enforce a maximum `data` field size of 4096 bytes.

#### `sequence_token` values

> The `sequence_token` values should be unique to the rendezvous session and the last modified time so that two clients can

Reviewer 6: Not quite sure how to read "unique to the rendezvous session". That sounds like a given server isn't allowed to use the same sequence token across different rendezvous sessions? I'm not sure why that would be necessary, but could you clarify?

Author: I have been back over my notes and I cannot find a reason for this requirement. I've checked the predecessor in MSC3886 to no avail.

In the secure channel layer we are already including both the rendezvous session ID and the sequence token in the additional authentication data calcuations. Therefore, I don't think we need the session ID to contribute to the sequence token at the lower level either.

As such I have removed in 64ff8a1f8633f6ef6f7ef3ed0cb2a8eddbdb4190

Mitigations that are included in this proposal:

- the low maximum payload size (4KB)
- payload is restricted to string
- the rendezvous session should be short-lived
- use of `Sec-Fetch-*` headers to not return payload content when browser has navigated to the session URL

## QR code format

To get a good trade-off between visual compactness and high level of error correction we use a binary mode QR with a
similar structure to that of the existing Device Verification QR code encoding described in [Client-Server
API](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.9/client-server-api/#qr-code-format).

It is proposed that the QR code format that is currently used in the Client-Server API for
[device verification](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/client-server-api/#qr-code-format) be extended to be more general
purpose and accommodate this new use case, and future use cases.

The "QR code version" would be repurposed to be a "QR code type" and used as the way to distinguish the format of the
subsequent data.

The existing cross verification code would be type `0x02`.  I suspect that type `0x01` and `0x00` might correspond to

> earlier iterations of the cross signing flow and so might want to be "reserved".

Reviewer 6: @uhoreg might remember the answer to this. 0x02 came from MSC1543, but I don't see any discussion of why 0x02.

Reviewer 3: At least `0x01` was used for an earlier iteration.  But I don't remember if `0x00` was as well, or if I started counting at 1.

by exploiting the fact that both of these devices are physically present during the exchange and offloading the check
that they are both in the correct state to the user performing the QR code login process.

Additionally the HPKE RFC exclusively defines unidirectional encryption. So, we use the scheme found in the [Oblivious
HTTP](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9458) RFC under the [Encapsulation of
Responses](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9458#name-encapsulation-of-responses) section to enable
bidirectional encryption.

We bind the secure channel to the specific rendezvous session by including the homeserver base URL, rendezvous session
ID and sequence token as additional authentication data in calls to the HPKE `Seal()` and `Open()` functions.

The existing security analyses of HPKE are applicable to our usage. We also discuss some potential pitfalls and attacks.

### Establishment

Participants:

- Device G: the device generating the QR code
- Device S: the device scanning the QR code

Regardless of which device generates the QR code, either device can be the existing (already signed in) device. The
other device is then the new device (one seeking to be signed in).

> 1. **Ephemeral key pair generation**

Reviewer 6: As with a comment I made over at #4108, the formatting as `<ol>` lists makes for remarkably hard reading. Could you convert these to headings?

Author: Done in 3c267fd063090d3e0b260f2046cf13b56766e428

  Both devices generate an _ephemeral_ Curve25519 key pair:

- Device G generates **(Gp, Gs)**, where **Gp** is its public key and **Gs** the private (secret) key.
- Device S generates **(Sp, Ss)**, where **Sp** is its public key and **Ss** the private (secret) key.

2. **Create rendezvous session**

Device G creates a rendezvous session by making a `POST` request (as described previously) to the nominated homeserver

> with an empty payload. It parses the **ID** received and **sequence token**.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
with an empty payload. It parses the response from the homeserver to extract the rendezvous session **ID**
and **sequence token**.
```

and establish the secure channel.

The information to be encoded is:

- Its public key **Gp**
- The insecure rendezvous session **ID**
- An indicator (the **intent**) to say if this is the new device which wishes to login, or an existing device
that wishes to facilitate the login of the new device
- the Matrix homeserver **[base URL]**

The format of this QR is defined in detail in a [separate section](#qr-code-format) of this proposal.

Device S scans and parses the QR code to obtain **Gp**, the rendezvous session **ID**, **intent** and the Matrix homeserver
**[base URL]**.

At this point Device S should check that the received intent matches what the user has asked to do on the device.

4. **Device S sends the initial payload**

Device S performs an ECDH operation using **Ss** and **Gp** to compute the shared secret **SharedSecret**.

The **SharedSecret** is then used to initialize an
[HPKE encryption context](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9180.html#name-encryption-and-decryption)
**Context_DeviceS_Send** using the `KeySchedule<ROLE>()` function.

After this step, **Ss** is discarded.

> **Context_DeviceS_Send**

Reviewer 6: I'm finding this formatting all a bit hard to read and follow. Unfortunately Github can't cope with code blocks in suggestions, so have my suggestions in two parts:

```suggestion
Device S performs an ECDH operation using **Ss** and **Gp** to compute the shared secret **SharedSecret**. It then discards **Ss**.

The **SharedSecret** is used to initialize an
[HPKE encryption context](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9180.html#name-encryption-and-decryption)
**Context_DeviceS_Send** using the `KeySchedule<ROLE>()` function, as follows:
```

Author: Ditto c56d9fa8fbc960a4610ecd167a83aa9429ffc4e3

```
SharedSecret := ECDH(Ss, Gp)

Context_DeviceS_Send := KeySchedule<S>(mode=0x00, shared_secret=SharedSecret, info="MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN")
```

With this, Device S has established its sending side of the secure channel. Device S then derives a confirmation payload

> that Device G can use to confirm that the channel is secure. It contains:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
With this, Device S has established its sending side of the secure channel. It then derives a confirmation
payload, **LoginInitiateMessage**, that Device G can use to confirm that the channel is secure. It contains:
```

- The string `MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN_INITIATE`, encrypted and authenticated with ChaCha20-Poly1305 using
  the `ContextS.Seal()` function of context **Context_DeviceS_Send** with additional authentication data:
  - the homeserver **base URL** from the QR code
  - the rendezvous session **ID** from the QR code
  - the **sequence token** returned by the homeserver when calling `GET` on the rendezvous session

> - Its public ephemeral key **Sp**.

Reviewer 6: The block below suggests that `Sp` comes first?

Author: Reordered in 98d3b04bf3841d82f1571073d8eec7d141146965

```

We define the result of `EncodeStringAsBytes(StringInput)` to be a sequence of bytes:

- two bytes in network byte order (big-endian) indicating the length in bytes of the `StringInput` as a UTF-8 string
- the `StringInput` as a UTF-8 string

e.g. `EncodeStringAsBytes("abcdef")` returns `[0x00, 0x06, 0x61, 0x62, 0x63, 0x64, 0x65, 0x66]`

n.b. Because this proposal restricts the length of `RendezvousId` and `SequenceToken` to 65535 bytes, and that a
`BaseUrl` longer than 65535 bytes will have failed at the point of encoding a QR, we don't specify a handling for
`StringInput` of length greater than 65535 bytes.

Device S then sends the **LoginInitiateMessage** as the `data` payload to the rendezvous session using a `PUT` request
and noting the new **sequence token**.

5. **Device G confirms**

Device G receives **LoginInitiateMessage** (potentially coming from Device S) from the insecure rendezvous session by
polling with `GET` requests.

It then does the reverse of the previous step, obtaining **Sp**, deriving the shared secret using ECDH on **Gs** and **Sp**,
discarding **Gs**, deriving an HPKE context `Context_DeviceG_Receive`:

**Context_DeviceG_Receive**

```

> (TaggedCiphertext, Sp) := Unpack(LoginInitiateMessage)

Reviewer 6: again, if Sp comes first in the message, this feels misleading

```suggestion
(Sp, TaggedCiphertext) := Unpack(LoginInitiateMessage)
```

SharedSecret := ECDH(Gs, Sp)

Context_DeviceG_Receive := KeySchedule<R>(mode=0x00, shared_secret=SharedSecret, info="MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN")
```

It then decrypts (and authenticates) the message using the `ContextR.Open()` function of **Context_DeviceG_Receive**
with the additional authentication data:
- the homeserver **base URL** as before
- the rendezvous session **ID** as before
- the **sequence token** returned by the homeserver when the original `POST` request was made to the rendezvous session

It checks that the plaintext matches the string `MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN_INITIATE`, failing and aborting if not.

```
Aad := EncodeStringAsBytes(BaseUrl) || EncodeStringAsBytes(RendezvousId) || EncodeStringAsBytes(SequenceToken)
Plaintext := Context_DeviceG_Receive.Open(TaggedCiphertext, Aad)

unless Plaintext == "MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN_INITIATE":
     FAIL
```

It then derives its own HPKE context **Context_DeviceG_Send** for sending based on the scheme from the
[Oblivious HTTP](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9458#name-encapsulation-of-responses) RFC, using a secret exported

> from **Context_DeviceG_Receive**:

Reviewer 6: I wondered what `[0;32]` was meant to mean. One possible way to clarify it:

```suggestion
It then derives its own HPKE context **Context_DeviceG_Send** for sending based on the scheme from the
[Oblivious HTTP](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9458#name-encapsulation-of-responses) RFC, using a secret exported
from **Context_DeviceG_Receive**, and a dummy exporter secret, as follows:
```

... with some rewording of the warning after the code block.

Author: Assuming I've understood correctly then I have applied in c56d9fa8fbc960a4610ecd167a83aa9429ffc4e3

**Context_DeviceG_Send**

```
Secret := Context_DeviceG_Receive.Export("MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN response", 32)

ResponseNonce := random(32)
Salt := Sp || ResponseNonce

AeadKey := HKDF_SHA256(Secret, "key", salt=Salt, size=32)

> AeadNonce := HKDF_SHA256(Secret, "key", salt=Salt, size=12)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
AeadNonce := HKDF_SHA256(Secret, "nonce", salt=Salt, size=12)
```

ExporterSecret := [0; 32]

Context_DeviceG_Send := Context<S>(AeadKey, AeadNonce, 0, ExporterSecret)
```

**Warning** The exporter interface of the **Context_DeviceG_Send** context **MUST NOT** be used, as it is initialized
with a dummy exporter secret. Aside from this limitation, the response context supports encryption and decryption in the
same manner as the primary context, enabling bidirectional use of HPKE.

> Following the creation of the response context **Context_DeviceG_Send**, it responds with a dummy payload containing the

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Device G then responds with a dummy payload, **LoginOkMessage**, containing the
```

> described in this step. The messages are encrypted by the result of the ECDH of G and S's ephemeral keys (plus extra
> steps). S knows that it has G's public key because it was obtained from the QR scan (we assume that the attacker can't
> modify the displayed QR code). So if it is able to decrypt and verify the message, then it knows:
>
> - that it was received directly from G, since nobody other than S and G could obtain the shared secret to encrypt
>   the message. In other words, the message from G to S was not tampered with.
> - that G has received the correct public key from S, otherwise the message from G would have been encrypted using
>   the wrong key, and would be undecryptable/unverifiable.
>
> Since, at this point, S knows that both devices have the correct public key for the other device, it knows that the
> encrypted channel is secure.

Device S receives a response over the insecure rendezvous session by polling with `GET` requests, potentially from
Device G.

It proceeds to derive the response context by unpacking the base response nonce from the **LoginOkMessage** and
creating a response context on its own.

**Context_DeviceS_Receive**

```

> (TaggedCiphertext, ResponseNonce) := Unpack(LoginOkMessage)

Reviewer 6: Once more, assuming the `ResponseNonce` comes first as implied by the previous section, this would be more clearly written as:

```suggestion
(ResponseNonce, TaggedCiphertext) := Unpack(LoginOkMessage)
```

Secret := Context_DeviceS_Send.Export("MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN response", 32)
Salt := Sp || ResponseNonce

AeadKey_G := HKDF_SHA256(Secret, "key", salt=Salt, size=32)
AeadNonce := HKDF_SHA256(Secret, "nonce", salt=Salt, size=12)
ExporterSecret := [0; 32]

Context_DeviceS_Receive := Context<R>(AeadKey, AeadNonce, 0, ExporterSecret)
```

> It decrypts (and authenticates) the response using the **Context_DeviceS_Receive** context, which will succeed provided

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
It then decrypts (and authenticates) the tagged ciphertext from the `LoginOkMessage` using the **Context_DeviceS_Receive** context, which will succeed provided
```

the payload was indeed sent by Device G. The additional authentication data is as before with the **sequence token**
being the one that was received when the `PUT` was made for **LoginInitiateMessage**.
It then verifies the plaintext matches `MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN_OK`, failing
otherwise.

```
Aad := EncodeStringAsBytes(BaseUrl) || EncodeStringAsBytes(RendezvousId) || EncodeStringAsBytes(SequenceToken)
Plaintext := Context_DeviceS_Receive.Open(TaggedCiphertext, Aad)

unless Plaintext == "MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN_OK":
     FAIL
```

> If the above was successful, Device S then calculates a two digit **CheckCode** code using the [HPKE export

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
If the above was successful, Device S then calculates a two digit **CheckCode** code in the range [10, 99] using the [HPKE export
```

Because the actual value of the code is not significant from a cryptographic point of view it is acceptable that the
digits 6, 7, 8 and 9 are slightly less likely to appear. Furthermore we also ensure that the first digit of the code is
not `0` to avoid confusion the user might have about whether to enter a leading zero.

The exact points in the flow that the user is prompted for the **CheckCode** is described in [MSC4108].

Device G compares the code that the user has entered with the **CheckCode** that it calculates using the same mechanism
as before:

```
CheckBytes := Context_DeviceG_Receive.Export("MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN_CHECKCODE" || Gp || Sp , size=2)
CheckCode := NumToString((CheckBytes[0] % 9) + 1) || NumToString(CheckBytes[1] % 10)
```

If the code that the user enters matches then the secure channel is established.

Subsequent payloads sent from G should be encrypted using the context **Context_DeviceG_Send**, while payloads
sent from S should be encrypted with **Context_DeviceS_Send**. Each call to the `Seal()` function should use the
additional authentication data of the form where the **sequence token** is from the last `GET` that the device received:

```

> Aad := EncodeStringAsBytes(BaseUrl) || EncodeStringAsBytes(RendezvousId) || EncodeStringAsBytes(SequenceToken)

Reviewer 6: I note that `SequenceToken` is under control of the attacker in our threat model, making me wonder if we need to guard more carefully against replay attacks. I think the channel establishment messages defined in this MSC are probably fine, since they have a defined sequence and each embeds a message identifier in the plaintext, but is that true of MSC4108?

Reviewer 2: More carefully compared to what's already described in the `Replay protection` [section](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4388/changes#diff-cea6a6c22bb49f55c9626ed95c1dd720ba0bb909e72ff672f93cd944b7ef4b4dR949-R954) of this MSC and the [HPKE RCF](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9180.html#name-replay-protection)?

Do you have some concrete additional protection in mind?

> but is that true of [MSC4108](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/4108)?

Could you expand on what you mean here? 

I'm going to try to answer as best as I can in the meantime.

Since MSC4108 depends on this MSC, all the replay protections provided by HPKE (each message has a unique sequence number which is used to derive the per-message nonce) and this MSC itself will apply to MSC4108.

Furthermore, the `SequenceToken` is now bound to the HPKE-internal sequence number by putting it into the AAD as well.

Reviewer 6: sorry for the delay in answering this, it got lost in the general github spam.

Anyway basically I'd missed that the HPKE context has an internal sequence number. Thanks.

```

Similarly, payloads received by G should be decrypted using the context **Context_DeviceG_Receive**, while payloads received by S
should be decrypted using the context **Context_DeviceG_Receive**. Each call to the `Open()` function should use the
additional authentication data of the form where the **sequence token** is from the last `PUT` that the device made:

```
Aad := EncodeStringAsBytes(BaseUrl) || EncodeStringAsBytes(RendezvousId) || EncodeStringAsBytes(SequenceToken)

> ```

Reviewer 6: This bit doesn't seem to be "establishment", so needs a new heading. It seems to overlap with the "Secure operations" section below. Can we combine the two?

Author: Combined in 95e6b6d228e49835a9bc32e1144debad360c3b68

```

### Secure operations

Conceptually, once established, the secure channel offers two operations, `SecureSend` and `SecureReceive`, which wrap
the `Send` and `Receive` operations offered by the rendezvous session API to securely send and receive data between two devices.

### Threat analysis

In an attack scenario, we add a participant called Specter with the following capabilities:

- Specter is present for QR code generation/scanning ("shoulder-surfing") and can scan the code themselves.
- Specter has full control over the network (in a Dolev-Yao sense), being able to observe and modify all traffic.
- Specter controls both the homeserver and the rendezvous server.

#### Replay protection

Due to use of ephemeral key pairs which are immediately discarded after use, each QR code login session derives a unique
secret so payloads from earlier sessions cannot be replayed. Each payload in the session is unique and expected only
once. Finally, replay of the initial message from S to G is prevented by the use of a randomly generated base nonce in

> the response from G to S, while deterministic per-message nonces prevent replay of any subsequent messages.

Reviewer 6: I'm not sure if this is unclear wording, or a hangover from a previous iteration of the protocol, but the per-message nonces come from the internals of the HPKE context. It would be good to clarify this.

Author: In 96239e7933fc88f9284deabd247bfb6ba35a98d1 I have deferred to the HPKE encryption contexts.

### Expiry

The rendezvous session (i.e. the payload) SHOULD expire after a period of time communicated to clients via the
`expires_in_ms` field on the `POST` and `GET` response bodies. After this point, any further attempts to query or update
the payload MUST fail. The rendezvous session can be manually expired with a `DELETE` call to the rendezvous session.

### `GET /_matrix/client/v1/rendezvous` - Discover if the rendezvous API is available

Rate-limited: Yes
Requires authentication: Optional - depending on server policy

Clients can use this endpoint to determine if the rendezvous API is available to them. Because the server policy may
require authentication, clients should make this request with their access token if they have one.

HTTP response codes, and Matrix error codes:

- `200 OK` - rendezvous API discovery supported
- `403 Forbidden` (`M_FORBIDDEN`) - the requester is not authorized to use the rendezvous API
- `404 Not Found` (`M_UNRECOGNIZED`) - the rendezvous API is not enabled
- `429 Too Many Requests` (`M_LIMIT_EXCEEDED`) - the request has been rate limited

The response body for `200 OK` is `application/json` with contents:

|Field|Type||
|-|-|-|

> |`create_available`|required `boolean`|`true` if the requester is able to create a rendezvous session using `POST /_matrix/client/v1/rendezvous` otherwise `false`|

Reviewer 7: Is there any case where you'd return `M_FORBIDDEN` over `"create_available": false`? Seems a bit redundant

Author: What I recall wanting to achieve is allowing an existing authenticated client to distinguish between an expired access token (that can be refreshed) and the server policy disallowing the rendezvous from being created.

In the case of a refresh being required it looks like the correct `errcode` is actually `M_UNKNOWN_TOKEN` (not `M_FORBIDDEN`) and as it is a common error code it wouldn't need specifying here at all.

I will double check this and update.

Reviewer 7: Yeah that sounds like it should be `M_UNKNOWN_TOKEN` and probably shouldn't be specified separately here. However, I'm not sure if there are any other endpoints that behave like this right now, so it might need some explanation.

Basically if auth is provided, but is invalid, then it'll fail the same way as an endpoint that requires auth would fail, even if auth isn't actually required

  activate B

  loop Device B polls the rendezvous session for a new payload
    B->>+HS: GET /_matrix/client/v1/rendezvous/abc-def-123-456
    alt is not modified
      HS->>-B: 200 OK<br>{"sequence_token": "2", "data": "Hello from A", "expires_in_ms": 300000}
    end
  end

  note over A: Device A then receives the new payload
  opt modified
      HS->>A: 200 OK<br>{"sequence_token": "2", "data": "Hello from B", "expires_in_ms": 300000}
  end
  deactivate A

  note over A: Device A sends a new payload
    A->>+HS: PUT /_matrix/client/v1/rendezvous/abc-def-123-456<br>{"sequence_token": "2", "data": "Hello again from A"}
    HS->>-A: 200 OK<br>{"sequence_token": "3"}

  note over B: Device B then receives the new payload
  opt modified
      HS->>B: 200 OK<br>{"sequence_token": "3", "data": "Hello again from B", "expires_in_ms": 300000}
  end

  deactivate B
```

### Implementation notes

#### Maximum payload size

The server MUST enforce a maximum `data` field size of 4096 bytes.

#### `sequence_token` values

A recommended implementation is a hash/digest of:

- the rendezvous ID
- a monotonic counter incremented on each successful write

> - the last `data` value written

Reviewer 7: Is there some practical benefit to this over just a monotonic counter?

Author: Looking at this afresh:

- the need to distinguish between identical payloads hails from ECIES was used to agree a shared symmetric key
- now that we are using two HPKE contexts the chances of having identical `data` in the payload are cryptographically small
- this sequence token was then (ab)used for the idempotency

A cleaner approach might be to:

- introduce an explicit client generated key that is sent with each `PUT` and is used to make those requests idempotent
- change the recommended sequence token format to be monotonic counter incremented on each successful write

Thoughts?

Reviewer 7: Ah that explains it. A separate transaction ID does sound sensible, especially if the network is bad and one side is retrying PUT requests while the other side has already received the data and has overwritten it with a response. In the current proposal, that would result in a concurrent write error on the retries (because the active data no longer matches) even though the original write was successful. Server-side implementation of that would basically be a map of transaction ID to sequence token, which hopefully won't be too complicated or heavy (if input txn ID is in map, just return correspinding sequence ID).

earlier iterations of the cross signing flow and so might want to be "reserved".

This proposal then adds a new type `0x03`.

The QR codes to be displayed and scanned using this format will encode binary strings in the general form:

- the ASCII string `MATRIX`
- one byte indicating the QR code type: `0x03` which identifies that the QR is part of this proposal
- one byte indicating the intent of the device generating the QR:
  - `0x00` a new device wishing to log in and self-verify
  - `0x01` an existing device wishing to facilitate the login of a new device and self-verify that other device
- the ephemeral Curve25519 public key that will be used for [secure channel establishment](#establishment), as 32 bytes
- the rendezvous session ID encoded as:
  - one byte indicating the length in bytes of the rendezvous session ID as a UTF-8 string
  - the rendezvous session ID as a UTF-8 string
- the [base URL] of the homeserver for client-server connections encoded as:
  - two bytes in network byte order (big-endian) indicating the length in bytes of the base URL as a UTF-8 string

>     (n.b. a base URL longer than 65,535 bytes cannot be encoded and should be rejected)

Reviewer 7: Even 255 bytes would probably be more than enough for the base URL. DNS names can't be more than 253 bytes (and generally don't get anywhere close to the limit) and subpaths are very rare too

TaggedCiphertext := Context_DeviceS_Send.Seal("MATRIX_QR_CODE_LOGIN_INITIATE", Aad)
LoginInitiateMessage := UnpaddedBase64(Sp || TaggedCiphertext)
```

We define the result of `EncodeStringAsBytes16(StringInput)` to be a sequence of bytes:

- two bytes in network byte order (big-endian) indicating the length in bytes of the `StringInput` as a UTF-8 string
- the `StringInput` as a UTF-8 string

e.g. `EncodeStringAsBytes16("abcdef")` returns `[0x00, 0x06, 0x61, 0x62, 0x63, 0x64, 0x65, 0x66]`

n.b. Because a `BaseUrl` longer than 65535 bytes will have failed at the point of encoding a QR, we don't specify a handling for
`StringInput` of length greater than 65535 bytes.

We define the result of `EncodeStringAsBytes8(StringInput)` to be a sequence of bytes:

- one byte indicating the length in bytes of the `StringInput` as a UTF-8 string
- the `StringInput` as a UTF-8 string

e.g. `EncodeStringAsBytes8("abcdef")` returns `[0x06, 0x61, 0x62, 0x63, 0x64, 0x65, 0x66]`

n.b. Because this proposal restricts the length of `RendezvousId` and `SequenceToken` to 255 bytes (according to the

> [opaque identifier grammar]) we don't specify a handling for `StringInput` of length greater than 266 bytes.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
[opaque identifier grammar]) we don't specify a handling for `StringInput` of length greater than 255 bytes.
```

?

Author: Well spotted 👍

This scheme is essentially [ECIES](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Integrated_Encryption_Scheme#Formal_description_of_ECIES)
instantiated with X25519, HKDF-SHA256 for the KDF and ChaCha20-Poly1305 (as specified by
[RFC8439](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8439#section-2.8)) for the authenticated encryption. Therefore,
existing security analyses of ECIES are applicable in this setting too. Nevertheless we include below a short
description of our instantiation of ECIES and discuss some potential pitfalls and attacks.

The primary limitation of ECIES is that there is no authentication for the initiating party (the one to send the first
payload; Device S in the text below). Thus the recipient party (the one to receive the first payload; Device G in the
text below) has no assurance as to who actually sent the payload. In QR code login, we work around this problem by
exploiting the fact that both of these devices are physically present during the exchange and offloading the check that
they are both in the correct state to the user performing the QR code login process.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
they are both in the correct state to the user performing the QR code login process.

Additionally the HPKE RFC exclusively defines unidirectional encryption. [Oblivious HTTP](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9458) is used to enable bidirectionl encryption in our chosen HPKE scheme.

```

#### `sequence_token` values

> The `sequence_token` values should be unique to the last modified time so that two clients can

Reviewer 6: I'm not really sure what "unique to the last modified time" means, either. It opens the question of "at what time resolution?".  I think we just want to say that it must change each time the channel is written to.

We might want to be explicit that it must change even in the case of a no-op write (i.e. when writing the current value back.)

Do we have a suggested implementation? A simple counter?

Author: I've tried to address this in 726e115440a9e9125367b2bc23b690e1faec8787 by clarifying the expected behaviour (in the main section of the spec) and then having a recommended implementation (in the implementation notes section).

I will update the Synapse implementation to match.

Author: The Synapse implementation is in https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/pull/19906
